## The developmental origin of complete metamorphosis in insects

Insect metamorphosis is a captivating aspect of animal research. The developmental origin and homology of the holometabolous pupa have spurred debate, with two main hypotheses: the 'Hinton' model posits homology between ancestral nymphs and holometabolous larvae, suggesting internalized wing development. It asserts that the pupa corresponds to the ultimate nymphal instar of the ancestor. The 'Berlese' model, in contrast, suggests holometabolous pupae are analogous to ancestral nymphs, with larvae corresponding to pronymphs. Given that insect wings are important markers of metamorphosis, to address this controversy, we employed micro-CT for non-destructive analysis of wing development process in locusts, ladybirds, and diamondback moths. Morphological and quantitative analysis showed that the main growth phase of wings occurs during the holometabolous prepupal and pupal stages, aligning with wing changes observed during hemimetabolous nymphal stages. Moreover, clustering analysis across various developmental stages revealed distinct gene expression patterns in holometabolous larvae. Additionally, the gene expression patterns in holometabolous prepupae and pupae are similar to those in hemimetabolous nymphs. These results support the 'Berlese' hypothesis from both morphological and gene expression patterns, providing new evidence for the developmental origins of complete metamorphosis, and clarifying the correspondences between the juvenile stages of holometabolous insects and their ancestors.

Code version:1.0

The code in "Code S1.md" is primarily used for standardization of expression levels and clustering analysis. The expression TPM matrix of different insects is available in Data S4. Before using, please convert the format of "Supplementary Data 4.xlsx" to xlsx.
